Synchronous communication in EDA (#4577)
MicrosoftDocs/architecture-center: docs/guide/architecture-styles/event-driven-content.md

- **Mediator topology**. This topology addresses some of the shortcomings of broker topology. There is an event mediator that manages and controls the flow of events. The event mediator maintains the state and manages error handling and restart capabilities. Unlike broker topology, components broadcast occurrences as commands and only to designated channels, usually message queues. These commands aren't expected to be ignored by their consumers. This topology offers more control, better distributed error handling, and potentially better data consistency. This topology does introduce increased coupling between components, and the event mediator could become a bottleneck or a reliability concern.

> Sometimes, the event producer requires an immediate response from the event consumer, such as obtaining a customer ID before proceeding with an order. In event-driven architecture, synchronous communication can be implemented in two main ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, the event producer requires an immediate response from the event consumer, such as obtaining a customer eligibility before proceeding with an order. In event-driven architecture, synchronous communication can be implemented in two main ways:
```

> - **Create two distinct queues.** a request queue and a reply queue. The event producer sends an asynchronous request to the request queue, pauses other operations, and waits for a response from the reply queue. Event consumers then process the request and send the reply back through the reply queue. This technique is more common and utilizes a correlation ID for tracking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Create two distinct queues**; a request queue and a reply queue. The event producer sends an asynchronous request to the request queue, pauses other operations, and waits for a response from the reply queue. Event consumers then process the request and send the reply back through the reply queue. This technique is a common implementation. The approach utilizes a session ID for tracking.
```

> - **Create two distinct queues.** a request queue and a reply queue. The event producer sends an asynchronous request to the request queue, pauses other operations, and waits for a response from the reply queue. Event consumers then process the request and send the reply back through the reply queue. This technique is more common and utilizes a correlation ID for tracking.

Reviewer: In retrospect I don't like where this in the document. Can you move this into the "challenges" section?  Meaning, a challenge is trying to use EDA for steps that need to follow a request-response pattern.  And this is the primary solution.  Also, let's make sure we're calling this is "request-response" implementation.  That is typically how we think about using buses for these situations.  Please also include a quick mention that some busses support this through a formal [ReplyTo](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/azure.messaging.servicebus.servicebusmessage.replyto) property so that the sender directs the consumer on where to respond.

> - **Create a dedicated ephemeral queue for each request.** This approach also pauses other operations by the event producer. Once the request is complete, the queue is deleted. While this technique is simpler, it lacks scalability, as the message broker must create and delete a queue for each request. 

Reviewer: I don't understand this one.  Let's keep it simple, and use Azure Storage queues as the example.  How would consumers know about this new queue to start monitoring?  Who deletes the queue (the consumer?  The publisher?).  I think this is too vague, and you're going to need to say a bit more.

  Another challenge with asynchronous communication is data loss. If any of the components crashes before successfully processing and handing over the event to its next component, then the event is dropped and never makes it into the final destination. To minimize the chance of data loss, persist in-transit events and remove or dequeue the events only when the next component has acknowledged the receipt of the event. These features are usually known as _client acknowledge mode_ and _last participant support_.

- Implementing a traditional request-response pattern.

>   Sometimes, the event producer requires an immediate response from the event consumer, such as obtaining a customer eligibility before proceeding with an order. In event-driven architecture, synchronous communication can be achieved through [request-response messaging](https://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/patterns/messaging/RequestReply.html). This pattern can be implemented in through utilizing multiple queues - a request queue, and a response queue: The event producer sends an asynchronous request to the request queue, pauses other operation on that task, and waits for a response in the reply queue. Event consumers then process the request and send the reply back through the preestablished reply queue. The approach utilizes a session ID for tracking so the event producer knows which message in the response queue is related to the specific request. This technique is a common implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Sometimes, the event producer requires an immediate response from the event consumer, such as obtaining a customer eligibility before proceeding with an order. In event-driven architecture, synchronous communication can be achieved through [request-response messaging](https://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/patterns/messaging/RequestReply.html).

  This pattern is usually implemented by utilizing multiple queues - a request queue and a response queue. The event producer sends an asynchronous request to a request queue, pauses other operation on that task, and awaits a response in the reply queue; effectively turning this into a synchronous process. Event consumers then process the request and send the reply back through a response queue. This approach usually utilizes a session ID for tracking, so the event producer knows which message in the response queue is related to the specific request. The original request could also specify the name of the response queue, potentially ephemeral, in a [reply-to header](/dotnet/api/azure.messaging.servicebus.servicebusmessage.replyto) or another mutually agreed-upon custom attribute.
```

  Another challenge with asynchronous communication is data loss. If any of the components crashes before successfully processing and handing over the event to its next component, then the event is dropped and never makes it into the final destination. To minimize the chance of data loss, persist in-transit events and remove or dequeue the events only when the next component has acknowledged the receipt of the event. These features are usually known as _client acknowledge mode_ and _last participant support_.

> - Implementing request-response pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Implementing a traditional request-response messaging pattern.
```

>   Sometimes, the event producer requires an immediate response from the event consumer, such as obtaining a customer eligibility before proceeding with an order. In event-driven architecture, synchronous communication can be achieved through request-response messaging, and it can be implemented in two main ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Sometimes, the event producer requires an immediate response from the event consumer, such as obtaining a customer eligibility before proceeding with an order. In event-driven architecture, synchronous communication can be achieved through [request-response messaging](https://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/patterns/messaging/RequestReply.html). This pattern can be implemented in through utilizing multiple queues - a request queue, and a response queue.
```

>   Sometimes, the event producer requires an immediate response from the event consumer, such as obtaining a customer eligibility before proceeding with an order. In event-driven architecture, synchronous communication can be achieved through [request-response messaging](https://www.enterpriseintegrationpatterns.com/patterns/messaging/RequestReply.html). This pattern can be implemented in through utilizing multiple queues - a request queue, and a response queue.

Reviewer: It does not contradict it, IMO.  The pattern is a queue for a request and a queue for a response. That doesn't imply anything about the lifecycle of either queue.

>   - **Create two distinct queues**; a request queue and a reply queue. The event producer sends an asynchronous request to the request queue, pauses other operations, and waits for a response from the reply queue. Event consumers then process the request and send the reply back through the reply queue. This technique is a common implementation. The approach utilizes a session ID for tracking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Establish two permanent queues**; a request queue and a reply queue. The event producer sends an asynchronous request to the request queue, pauses other operation on that task, and waits for a response in the reply queue. Event consumers then process the request and send the reply back through the preestablished reply queue. The approach utilizes a session ID for tracking so the event producer knows which message in the response queue is related to the specific request. This technique is a common implementation.
```

>   - **Establish two permanent queues**; a request queue and a reply queue. The event producer sends an asynchronous request to the request queue, pauses other operation on that task, and waits for a response in the reply queue. Event consumers then process the request and send the reply back through the preestablished reply queue. The approach utilizes a session ID for tracking so the event producer knows which message in the response queue is related to the specific request. This technique is a common implementation.

Author: > pauses other operation on that task

Just to be clear: My understanding is that event producer pauses all other operations, not just operations regarding that specific task.

Reviewer: Why would it do that?  That seems highly inefficient and would be a terrible bottleneck.

Author: Fair point.

>   - **Create a dedicated ephemeral queue for each request.** An ephemeral queue is a specialized queue that is exclusively recognized by the event producer for a particular request. The event producer can either create this ephemeral queue manually or it may be generated automatically by the message broker. The event producer sends a message to the queue, specifying the name of the ephemeral queue in the reply-to header, [ReplyTo](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/azure.messaging.servicebus.servicebusmessage.replyto) property or another mutually agreed-upon custom attribute, and pauses other operations. Any messages directed to this queue are solely for the event producer that initiated them. Once the event consumer receives the message, processes the request, and sends a response to the reply queue indicated in the reply-to header, the event producer retrieves this response and subsequently deletes the ephemeral queue. While this technique is simpler, it lacks scalability because a dedicated queue must be created and deleted for each request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Create an ephemeral queue for each response.** This version behaves like the prior solution, but instead of having a preexisting response queue established, this approach uses an ephemeral queue that is exclusively recognized by the event producer for a particular request. The event producer can either create this ephemeral queue or it may be generated automatically by the message broker. The event producer sends the initial request to the queue, specifying the name of the ephemeral queue in a [reply-to header](/dotnet/api/azure.messaging.servicebus.servicebusmessage.replyto) or another mutually agreed-upon custom attribute. Any messages directed to this queue are expected to be solely for the event producer that initiated them. Once the event consumer receives the message, processes the request, and sends a response to the reply queue indicated in the message header. The original event producer retrieves this response and subsequently deletes the ephemeral queue. This approach can lack scalability because a dedicated queue must be created and deleted for each request. Also, this solution could run into service limits on queue creation, rate or quantity.
```

>   - **Create an ephemeral queue for each response.** This version behaves like the prior solution, but instead of having a preexisting response queue established, this approach uses an ephemeral queue that is exclusively recognized by the event producer for a particular request. The event producer can either create this ephemeral queue or it may be generated automatically by the message broker. The event producer sends the initial request to the queue, specifying the name of the ephemeral queue in a [reply-to header](/dotnet/api/azure.messaging.servicebus.servicebusmessage.replyto) or another mutually agreed-upon custom attribute. Any messages directed to this queue are expected to be solely for the event producer that initiated them. Once the event consumer receives the message, processes the request, and sends a response to the reply queue indicated in the message header. The original event producer retrieves this response and subsequently deletes the ephemeral queue. This approach can lack scalability because a dedicated queue must be created and deleted for each request. Also, this solution could run into service limits on queue creation, rate or quantity.

Author: > Create an ephemeral queue for each response.

My understanding is that the temporary queue is used for both request and reply. So, I think such title can be a bit misleading / confusing. But I leave it up to you.

Reviewer: How would the consumer know about the queue?

Author: Fair point. Probably it has to be implemented somewhere code, but probably it can vary depending on the message broker. If you don't like this 2nd option, we can just remove it. I'm not religious about it :)

Author: I'm going to remove the second part.
